---
toc: true
layout: post
description: Lessons learnt from wrangling Conda environments.
categories: [Conda, Virtual Environments]
title: Python Conda environments - The Sharp Edges and How to Avoid Them
date: 2020-09-19
---
## Conda is awesome

I'm a huge fan of Conda. If you work with Python packages that wrap or bind to
applications or libraries written in other languages Conda is a fantastic way to install
them as it not only installs the Python package but the application or library and the
necessary configuration to tie them together too. For example I installed Tensorflow GPU
the Google recommended way by installing the appropriate Nvidia drivers, then middleware
libraries, then finally pip installing Tensorflow whilst tweaking environment variables
and paths to integrate those all together and that not a fun way to burn away an hour or
two of your life. With Conda I just type "conda install tensorflow-gpu" - go make a
coffee and all that hassle is dealt with. Some packages like
[Nvidia RAPIDS](https://rapids.ai/start.html) can only be installed with Conda - unless
you're brave enough to build it from source. Conda can save you from dependency
management hell and give you back many hours of your life. You can even use it as a
cross platform app installer too, for example installing and updating the popular
[QGIS](https://anaconda.org/conda-forge/qgis) application. Who needs Chocolatey,
Homebrew, or apt-get when you have Conda.

## But Conda can still burn you

Despite being more idiot-proof and much faster than most methods for installing packages
with complex dependencies there are unfortunately still quite a few ways to trip up when
using Conda so I wanted to cover some gotchas and hopefully spare others some of the
pain I've experienced using Conda environments.

## Even with best practises Conda environments will break anyway (but much less often)

Even if you follow all my recommendations your Conda environments will break sooner or
later if you keep upgrading them. It's unfortunate but package authors are human and
dependency management is hard. Occasionally a package will be released with a bug that
evaded the package's test suite (the test coverage could be limited or the quality of
the tests might vary across different platforms). Also semantic versioning and pinned
dependencies aren't perfect either - the author of a foundational package can
inadvertently make a breaking change to their API than can ripple through other
dependent packages in your environment. The more packages you install into one
environment and the more often you update those packages the odds start to stack up that
one or more packages will be in a bad state and you'll find your scripts and code that
used to work in that environment now break and error out.

It's not all bad news though, there's several strategies to restoring a broken
environment which I'll cover next and if you're patient sometimes the package bugs or
dependency issues will be fixed for you next time you do an update.

### Record your environment configuration

My first practise when creating a new Conda environment is to document the packages I
install. You can extract the package list after the fact using Conda's export option to
[save a Yaml file](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/tasks/manage-environments.html#id15)
that you can re-use to create the environment. I'm assuming here you're using the
terminal (Anaconda console on Windows) and not Anaconda Navigator or PyCharm IDE to
create your environment. I like the
[Anaconda install](https://www.anaconda.com/products/individual) if you're setting an
environment up for a new Python user and you want a good mix of packages prior to
covering virtual environments. If you're already at the stage of wanting to install
additional packages and creating new virtual environments for them I strongly recommend
using the [Miniconda install](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html) and
creating your environments using the terminal
[commands](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/tasks/manage-environments.html)
. For documenting my environments I prefer a simple technique - record the command line
you used to create your environment should worst case you need to reinstall it (or
recreate it on a new computer) to a document (I use a Google doc). Remember if you
install additional packages into your environment at a later time to go back and update
this document.

![Screenshot](../../img/google_doc_conda.png)

Part of the reason I use a document rather than just export the Conda environment is I
use Jupyter Lab in a lot of my environments so I want to record the additional commands
for installing and enabling the Jupyter Lab extensions should I need to recreate the
environment (some Conda packages will install their corresponding Jupyter lab extensions
... but not all do and there's some debate on whether that is a good practise in the
Jupyter lab community given Jupyter could be accessed from a different machine to the
one with the Python package). This environment document becomes my ultimate fallback if
my Conda environment breaks and I need to delete and reinstall the whole environment,
but before resorting to reinstalling if an update has broken your environment there's
some faster strategies to try first that will probably get things working again.

### Restoring a broken Conda environment

Conda actually maintains a list of revisions to your environment each time you install a
new package or update some existing packages. At any point if things go wrong you can
revert to an earlier version of your environment. This is something I hadn't known about
for months when first using Conda and I wasted a lot of time recreating environments
when a simple restore would've been a lot quicker an easier. Check out the environment
[revision list and install revision commands](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/tasks/manage-environments.html#restoring-an-environment).
It is quite straight-forward to use:

- it works a bit like a git revert, it creates a new revision that attempts to match the
- configuration of the older target revision - it doesn't discard all subsequent
- revisions since the target revision. This won't perfectly restore all your environment
- state and there's a chance it won't fix a bad update but it's probably the first thing
- to try if you notice you've gotten a bad update.

### Pinning and installing a specific package version

Another option if you've been unlucky enough to update to a broken version of a
particular package is to revert that specific package. You can use the same conda list
--revisions command to see what the version of the package was when it was last working
then explicitly install the good version of the package to force a downgrade. For
example if you were an early adopter of Pandas 1.0 but ran into some of its bugs you
could:

```shell
conda install pandas=0.25.3
```

To revert back to the previous Pandas version.

## Tips to make Conda Environments break less often

I've covered a few options to handle Conda environments breaking and I did that first as
it is only a question of when and not if it will happen. There are other steps you can
take though to reduce the chances of environments getting into a broken state in the
first place though which I'll cover next.

### Keep your environments simple

As I mentioned earlier the more packages you install in one environment and the more
often you update them the odds of that environment imploding get uncomfortably high. I
have (more than once) gotten over enthusiastic with installing every cool sounding
machine learning, data processing, and data visualisation package into one Ãœber
environment and I always end up regretting it. Beyond packages just breaking it can
really slow down the dependency resolving when updating or installing new packages.
You're also more likely to get stuck with older versions of packages, as bottlenecks
will form between the complicated web of package dependencies if you let an environment
become too bloated. The Anaconda
[base environment](https://docs.anaconda.com/anaconda/packages/pkg-docs/) is probably a
good example of a dangerously large number of packages in a single environment. It works
there because they have painstakingly tested all the versions of those packages together
for compatibility - if you were to manually add all those packages into a new
environment or were brave enough to start updating all the packages in your base
Anaconda environment or installing new packages to the base environment you'll run into
trouble pretty quickly. Keep your environments simple, as a general rule don't update
the base Anaconda environment (with the exception of the conda package itself which is
recommended) and if you don't need to update your environment leave it be (I am a
compulsive upgrader though which is why I have run into this pain point multiple times).

### Enable channel priority strict

I didn't know about this option until I read the
[conda-forge instructions](https://conda-forge.org/) more carefully but enabling strict
channel priority by running this command:

```shell
conda config --set channel_priority strict
```

or manually pasting the line

```shell
channel_priority: strict
```

into your .condarc file is a good idea.

Strict channel priority can save a lot of pain as the compiled libraries in different
Conda channels aren't always binary compatible and if you start mixing packages from
different channels (conda-forge and defaults channel packages for example) you can
experience some nasty run time errors.

As I understand it, strict channel priority will always prefer packages from the higher
priority channels (the channels listed first in your .condarc file if not manually
specified) even if they are a lower version than the same package available from lower
priority channels.

conda-forge is my favourite channel so I do use conda-forge instead of the defaults
channel for most Conda environments - if I am updating my Miniconda base environment
I will explicitly make it use the conda-forge channel on the command line (the first
time you do this it will replace many of your default channel installed packages), e.g.

```shell
conda update -n base -c conda-forge conda conda-build conda-verify ripgrep mamba python
```

My general rule is try to prefer a single channel source for most packages in an
environment (and always use the same channel priorities for updating an environment as
what you did when you created it). If you know a package is pure Python that should be
safe to install regardless of what channel it comes from, but for packages that contain
compiled libraries it is riskier to install them from different channels into the same
environment.

## Other things to be wary of with Conda

That covers most of the important points but there's a few other less common issues I've
encountered which I'll quickly go over in case anyone runs into these.

### Mixing Pip and Conda packages

If you encounter a package on PyPi that doesn't exist on any Conda channel it is
possible to pip install it into a Conda environment. I generally try to avoid this but
if you do need to do it I believe the recommended approach is to create your Conda
environment and install as many packages from Conda first as possible. Then pip install
any packages you can't install with Conda - pip should recognise any dependencies it
needs that have already been installed with Conda. I haven't experimented with this
much, but I believe that you shouldn't go back and install or update different Conda
packages after pip installing packages - you should remove and follow the same steps to
create the environment again if you wish to update the Conda packages in an environment
with pip packages installed (I don't have much experience with this but would welcome
any feedback from other coders that have done this). I'd also mention if a PyPi package
is pure Python it isn't very difficult to convert that to a Conda package (conda-forge
has some good tools with tutorials and examples for doing this) so if you find a popular
PyPi package that isn't on a Conda channel please consider converting it yourself.

### Write permissions on the working directory on Windows

One issue I've encountered on corporate Windows machines (Anaconda/Miniconda can install
to the user local directory and don't need local system admin in that case) is that when
installing or updating I noticed some packages download temporary files to the working
directory. I had an issue on a work computer where the Anaconda console would open up to
the root C drive (with no write permission) and when attempting to create/update Conda
environments Conda would just lock up - it didn't error out or log a message that I
noticed (I had to use the Windows dev tools to diagnose the problem) but would just stay
frozen on the package installing... My fix was to edit the Anaconda console shortcut to
default to the user local directory instead of root C drive. This issue occurred a while
ago and may be fixed now.

### DLL hell on Windows

Another issue I found on Windows was DLL name clashes with Numpy which would happen
every time I tried to import Numpy from a script run from the Anaconda console. The fix
I found in that case was to set the CONDA_DLL_SEARCH_MODIFICATION_ENABLE environment
variable to 1 - you can Google that environment variable and read about related fixes in
the [Conda troubleshooting guide](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/troubleshooting.html#numpy-mkl-library-load-failed).

### Adding a Path directly to a Conda environment on Windows (Don't do this!)

Before I had a good answer to the DLL problem in the previous point a quick and dirty
work-around was to manually add the Conda environment binary and script directories to
my Windows Path (Anaconda/Miniconda will even offer to add the base environment to the
Windows path for you when installing but recommends against it). This is a very tempting
hack for new Conda users since it avoids the DLL and path resolutions issues that are a
nasty pain point when starting out (I even see certain cloud VM configurations that use
this hack) - but long term it is bad because it breaks the whole purpose of having
multiple environments. If you activate a different Conda environment but leave the Path
variable pointing to the libraries of the first Conda environment you're asking for some
potentially nasty bugs when the wrong library files get used. The only time you might be
able to get away with this is if you install Anaconda and **only** use the base
environment and don't use any other Python environments on the same system.

I still have run into some DLL resolution issues even with the
CONDA_DLL_SEARCH_MODIFICATION_ENABLE fix when debugging with Visual Studio Code. I found
the trick there was to set a PYTHONPATH environment variable in the launch.json (PyCharm
sets the PYTHONPATH variable to some sensible defaults out of the box for you but Visual
Studio Code takes a bit more effort). As with regular Paths don't permanently add a
PYTHONPATH environment variable to your system environment variables (that is no better
than adding an environments binary paths to the system Path variable) - make sure the
PYTHONPATH is configured by your IDE or within your terminal session - not permanently
as a system environment variable.

### Other issues

If a Conda install or update fails for other reasons it will normally provide you a link
to a log file where you can find the specific details. I've had issues where some Conda
packages depended on git being installed and I only noticed that from the log file. You
can always fallback to the age old technique of Googling the exact error message as it
appears in the terminal or log file and also check the troubleshooting guide mentioned
above if you encounter anything else.

## Conclusion

I hope this advice helps. I refer back to the Conda documentation often. If you find
what appear to be bugs in Conda itself please do raise them on the
[Conda GitHub page](https://github.com/conda/conda). If you like Conda you can follow
[Anaconda on Twitter](https://twitter.com/anacondainc?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor)
or follow [Peter Wang](https://bsky.app/profile/wang.social) - the founder of Anaconda
himself as he occasionally responds directly to user questions.

If you spot any mistakes in my guide or have any experiences with Conda environments you
think are useful to share feel free to message me from one of the links below. I'm
always keen to learn more and share what I learn as I go.
